README.md, before:

# Interoperability Project

A project to demonstrate continious technical demonstration of interoperability between DID Methods, Wallets, Agents, Encrypted Data Vaults, and Verifiable Credentials.

The project consists of a series of tools and web applications.

- [Meeting page/agendas](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/interoperability/blob/master/agenda.md)
- [Meeting recordings](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1wgccmMvIImx30qVE9GhRKWWv3vmL2ZyUauuKx3IfRmA/edit#gid=2146749098)

## [Explainer](./docs/explainer.md)

This group is primarily a "project management" group, working to educate across communities and minimize redundant or wasted work. We strive to be a welcoming place for people new to the space to get up to speed on what's happening elsewhere, as well as for insider and specialists to report out about cutting-edge development, particularly the most relevant work happening *outside* of DIF.

We keep a running bibliography of input documents [on our Notion](https://www.notion.so/dif/be6763341a014d248f655aea187d7890?v=c9ac48a07f3d411c9a1bea32b55f7e76). To suggestion additions or updates, please open a new github issue. If it is uncontroversial, we may unceremoniously close your issue after updating the notion.

Our [agenda](agenda.md) is stored here in github-- please edit it in hackmd to propose future agenda items, and/or open issues for broader agenda questions.

## [Endorsements](./docs/endorsements.md)

## [Projects](./projects)

- Ongoing educational curation of DIF [youtube channel](https://studio.youtube.com/channel/UCicZIzvOXOyij0A6jlA7nxQ?c=UCicZIzvOXOyij0A6jlA7nxQ)
- [VC Spec Map](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/vc-spec-map), created, researched and maintained by independent researcher Michael Ruminer
- Ongoing [bibliography](https://www.notion.so/dif/be6763341a014d248f655aea187d7890?v=c9ac48a07f3d411c9a1bea32b55f7e76) of input documents and references

## Minor Deliverables

Open to pull requests and issues if you spot factual errors or significant omissions!

| Name | Description | status/version | most recent link | date | 
|---|---|---|---|---|
|---|STRAWMEN/ONGOING|---|
|Wallet Cred Format Matrix| A high-level survey of "wallets" and wallet-link things, showing their current and roadmapped credential-type support as a simple markdown matrix | ongoing / crowdsource (hackmd still open)| [hackmd](https://hackmd.io/t1cotiReTXCnkpDG8k2tVA) | oct 24 2020 |
|---|VERSIONED|---|
|Map (pdf)| A drilled-down map of all the varieties of components used in a core set of decentralized identity applications known to the group|v0.0.9|[github pdf](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/crosscommunity-architecture-survey-oct-2020.pdf)| oct 24 2020|
|Map (pdf)| A simplified graphic interpretation of the above, used for planning purposes in a German Schaufenster project and submitted by a member |v0.0.9|[github pdf](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/interoperability/blob/master/assets/interop-mapping-version-by-Hakan-Yildiz(TUB).pdf)| nov 2020|
|Map (whimsical)|Same as above, except in editable and commentable (DIF-controlled) Whimsical diagram|v0.0.9|[whimsical](https://whimsical.com/CUhk3dT4RUZvGa4Lt7rNvD)|sept 2020|
|Map Familiarity Survey| A self-assesment for members to express their general familiarity or conceptual understanding of all the items on v0.0.9 of the map above|v0.0.9|[hoolie survey]((https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1ohv_40BFVXc9uVfESJawu9O0UrXxfI60j_QkBYjukUg/edit?usp=drive_web))|Oct 2020|
|Map Familiarity Survey results analysis| Infographic showing relative high and low points for familiarity of the core group (24 responses)|v0.0.9|[github PDF](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/crosscommunity-architecture-familiarity-survey-result-oct-2020.pdf)|Oct 2020|  
|SSI 101 #iiw31 Slides (PDF)| Karyl Fowler's and Juan Caballero's pitch deck from SSI101 session at #IIW31| v1 (exhibited at conference)| [github PDF](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/knowledge-base--october-2020.pdf)| oct 24 2020 |
|SSI 101 #iiw31 Recording (Youtube)| Video of Karyl Fowler's and Juan Caballero's full session, including Q&A, from SSI101 session at #IIW31| v1 (exhibited at conference)| [youtube](https://youtu.be/DaM0UtQTLCs)| oct 24 2020 |
|Architectural Stack & Community Efforts overview (aka "the three stacks diagram")| Rouven Heck's interpretation of the spec landscape mapped onto layers 1-3 of the ToIP mental model, across the W3C-centric, Hyperledger, and DIF communities. |v1| [github (PDF)](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/ssi-architectural-stack--and--community-efforts-overview.pdf)|Sept 2020|


## Related DIF Work

- [Papers](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/papers)
- [DID Auth JOSE](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/did-auth-jose)
- [Universal Resolver](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/universal-resolver)

## Mailing List

Please join the mailing list by sending an email to: InteropProject+subscribe@dif.groups.io

Commit message:

added new blog post to deliverables

README.md, after:

# Interoperability Project

A project to demonstrate continious technical demonstration of interoperability between DID Methods, Wallets, Agents, Encrypted Data Vaults, and Verifiable Credentials.

The project consists of a series of tools and web applications.

- [Meeting page/agendas](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/interoperability/blob/master/agenda.md)
- [Meeting recordings](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1wgccmMvIImx30qVE9GhRKWWv3vmL2ZyUauuKx3IfRmA/edit#gid=2146749098)

## [Explainer](./docs/explainer.md)

This group is primarily a "project management" group, working to educate across communities and minimize redundant or wasted work. We strive to be a welcoming place for people new to the space to get up to speed on what's happening elsewhere, as well as for insider and specialists to report out about cutting-edge development, particularly the most relevant work happening *outside* of DIF.

We keep a running bibliography of input documents [on our Notion](https://www.notion.so/dif/be6763341a014d248f655aea187d7890?v=c9ac48a07f3d411c9a1bea32b55f7e76). To suggestion additions or updates, please open a new github issue. If it is uncontroversial, we may unceremoniously close your issue after updating the notion.

Our [agenda](agenda.md) is stored here in github-- please edit it in hackmd to propose future agenda items, and/or open issues for broader agenda questions.

## [Endorsements](./docs/endorsements.md)

## [Projects](./projects)

- Ongoing educational curation of DIF [youtube channel](https://studio.youtube.com/channel/UCicZIzvOXOyij0A6jlA7nxQ?c=UCicZIzvOXOyij0A6jlA7nxQ)
- [VC Spec Map](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/vc-spec-map), created, researched and maintained by independent researcher Michael Ruminer
- Ongoing [bibliography](https://www.notion.so/dif/be6763341a014d248f655aea187d7890?v=c9ac48a07f3d411c9a1bea32b55f7e76) of input documents and references

## Minor Deliverables

Open to pull requests and issues if you spot factual errors or significant omissions!

| Name | Description | status/version | most recent link | date | 
|---|---|---|---|---|
|---|STRAWMEN/ONGOING|---|
|Wallet Cred Format Matrix| A high-level survey of "wallets" and wallet-link things, showing their current and roadmapped credential-type support as a simple markdown matrix | ongoing / crowdsource (hackmd still open)| [hackmd](https://hackmd.io/t1cotiReTXCnkpDG8k2tVA) | oct 24 2020 |
|---|VERSIONED|---|
|Interop Targets (essay)| An overview of the multi-polar terrain of interoperability test suites and harnesses | 1/2 |[dif blog](https://blog.identity.foundation/setting-interoperability-targets/)|Q1 2021|
|Map (pdf)| A drilled-down map of all the varieties of components used in a core set of decentralized identity applications known to the group|v0.0.9|[github pdf](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/crosscommunity-architecture-survey-oct-2020.pdf)| oct 24 2020|
|Map (pdf)| A simplified graphic interpretation of the above, used for planning purposes in a German Schaufenster project and submitted by a member |v0.0.9|[github pdf](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/interoperability/blob/master/assets/interop-mapping-version-by-Hakan-Yildiz(TUB).pdf)| nov 2020|
|Map (whimsical)|Same as above, except in editable and commentable (DIF-controlled) Whimsical diagram|v0.0.9|[whimsical](https://whimsical.com/CUhk3dT4RUZvGa4Lt7rNvD)|sept 2020|
|Map Familiarity Survey| A self-assesment for members to express their general familiarity or conceptual understanding of all the items on v0.0.9 of the map above|v0.0.9|[hoolie survey]((https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1ohv_40BFVXc9uVfESJawu9O0UrXxfI60j_QkBYjukUg/edit?usp=drive_web))|Oct 2020|
|Map Familiarity Survey results analysis| Infographic showing relative high and low points for familiarity of the core group (24 responses)|v0.0.9|[github PDF](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/crosscommunity-architecture-familiarity-survey-result-oct-2020.pdf)|Oct 2020|  
|SSI 101 #iiw31 Slides (PDF)| Karyl Fowler's and Juan Caballero's pitch deck from SSI101 session at #IIW31| v1 (exhibited at conference)| [github PDF](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/knowledge-base--october-2020.pdf)| oct 24 2020 |
|SSI 101 #iiw31 Recording (Youtube)| Video of Karyl Fowler's and Juan Caballero's full session, including Q&A, from SSI101 session at #IIW31| v1 (exhibited at conference)| [youtube](https://youtu.be/DaM0UtQTLCs)| oct 24 2020 |
|Architectural Stack & Community Efforts overview (aka "the three stacks diagram")| Rouven Heck's interpretation of the spec landscape mapped onto layers 1-3 of the ToIP mental model, across the W3C-centric, Hyperledger, and DIF communities. |v1| [github (PDF)](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/decentralized-identity.github.io/blob/master/assets/ssi-architectural-stack--and--community-efforts-overview.pdf)|Sept 2020|


## Related DIF Work

- [Papers](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/papers)
- [DID Auth JOSE](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/did-auth-jose)
- [Universal Resolver](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/universal-resolver)

## Mailing List

Please join the mailing list by sending an email to: InteropProject+subscribe@dif.groups.io
